We're talking about the fact that we're seeing
high density in a traditional sense, high
density, rather than the Houston notion of high
density, 16 units to the acre. We're talking about
high rise condominiums. We're seeing these
things springing up in these activity centers
that you would have normally, through a planning
process, I would assume, put your residential
areas uh around those activity centers to
minimize the travel and we're seeing that take
place right now in greenway plaza around the
downtown area continuing
demand for residential properties around the the
downtown area and around the greenway plaza
galleria area well those are three no more there's
probably more It just depends on what you want. You
can call it Greenspoint Mall, Sharpstown Mall,
Gulfgate, Northwest Crossing. The big three
basically are the Galleria, Greenway Plaza, and
Downtown. Medical Center is a little different
kind of operation, but it's a big one too.
But I think that Whether the market forces, you
know, the market doesn't give a goddamn what
happens. The market merely is a reflection of what
is. And they say it's a market approach, but
whatever it is, there seems to be a clear, in my
mind, a little bit of a turnaround toward
continued expansion, you know, lot after lot
after lot, because it's just too goddamn
expensive. You know, you get the fuel costs, the
heating and cooling costs. It's becoming a little
bit prohibitive, especially for young people, to
buy a single family house, number one. Number two,
if they buy one, it's out 35 miles from the city, and
they've got to pay to drive in and out of town.
That's a problem. Of course, on the other hand,
you've got some corporations moving out into the
suburbs. So we've got both, you know, you don't
know whether the people follow the jobs or the jobs
follow the people. We've got both phenomena
occurring right here. On balance, do you think,
which direction is being favored currently? Is
there a centripetal or a centripetal force? Well,
you can look around downtown and see what we've got
going in. Which is? A lot of very tall buildings, a
lot of office space, like Texas Commerce Tower.
How many stories? That was 75. We've got a 70-story
building that hadn't gotten out of the hole yet and
just finished a 65-story, which is the first
international plaza. First city's built a couple
of big buildings. I'm not sure how big they are. But
that's the Gerald Hines building, the one we're
talking about across the city hall, the Ken
Schnitzer building, that's a Gerald Pines
building. So you do have, you know, an
intensification of downtown office space, and
most of these places are new stuff now, even before
the... But you do have, you've got movement out to
the suburbs as well. Is it on, would you say... the
equal of the in-city development?
It probably is. It's not as dramatic because you
don't see it. It doesn't go straight up. But I don't
know what the balance is. I really don't. Maybe
Roscoe, as planner, would know that. He probably
does. That's a good question for Roscoe.
Now, tell me about transportation. in Houston
since you've been here.
Where has it come from? What are its problems? And
where withergoes Houston in terms of mass
transportation? And I suppose that in mass
transportation, we ought to include mass transit
as well as the freeway system, if you want to call it
a freeway system, which to me is a misnomer in the
case of Houston. What do you mean? It ain't free.
There ain't no way. It's virtually always
bottlenecked and quite hazardous.
I would say it's probably the poorest designed
urban freeway system I have encountered in the
United States.
Personally, as a planner, I would say that. For you
or Mayor McConnell. Yeah, I think that they...
They didn't limit access enough on the dock is the
main problem. On the gulf? Huh? On the gulf? No, on
any of it. On any of it? On Southwest Freeway in
particular inside the loop. It's ridiculous.
You're getting on while somebody's getting off.
Sometimes you can't. It is a mess. And the signing
seems to assume that you are a resident and have
been since birth. Yeah, yeah. I'll buy that
sometimes. It's a little confusing. And you never
know where to turn until the moment of truth, and
then it's too late. It very well may be. I don't
know. You've become used to it. Yeah, I've talked
to the highway department. The highway boys,
that's all they do. If you're a stranger in town,
it's merciless. I think it's much better than
Dallas. Much easier to me. That's no distraction.
Yeah, well, I mean, we're always being compared to
Dallas, which is like comparing San Francisco to
Los Angeles. I mean, it's almost the same
parallel. I wouldn't want to do that. No, I mean,
but not comparing San Francisco to Dallas or L.A.
to Houston, but the various mentalities. People
do compare Houston to Los Angeles, and in all
candor, when I hear this said, I recoil. This is not
my interview, but I can't help but get into the
actor a little bit, being from the West Coast and
California, I know, as it were, to some degree.
But, you know, there are parts of Los Angeles that
are downright beautiful. Oh, yeah. There are
parts of Houston that are downright beautiful.
Well, you've got to look for them, and you've got to
look very hard for them. Whereas in Los Angeles,
they're apparent. and they are outrageously
beautiful and attractive, and everything is done
right from the planning point of view. Now, I don't
believe that Houston has any rightful claim to be
the Los Angeles of Texas. We don't mean to be. We
mean to be the Houston of Texas. That's all. Okay,
you said it. Yes, I did. Now, what does this mean?
Nothing. We have, in Houston, we have, I think of it
as, a very Texan mentality when it comes to
governance. And the people of this city
do not like intervention on the part of the
government. And although you hear people
bitching about the streets being bad and the
garbage not being picked up and everything, there
is a refusal on the part of the powers that be to want
to pay for a higher quality of service. When push
comes to shove, you can talk about efficiency and
everything. But when you're underfunded 400%,
you're not going to be able to do your job. And the
cost of government goes up just like the cost of
everything else. And I think that people are
willing to pass bond issues And they're willing to
pay, but they don't want to very much. And I think
the city, since I've been here, I think we're
getting more. Houston was considered a place
where you worked and not where you lived. And I
think we're getting a little turnaround. We're
getting some people here to say, hey, you know,
this is the shits. You know, let's clean it up.
Let's do something about it. And there's some
people that are really trying to do that. And
there's some people that say, you know, Forget it.
I'm not going to pay. It's a place where you make a
fast buck, and there are some people like that. I
don't think that that totally pervades the whole
society like we are accused of in many places.
Especially as the popular press currently.
Popular press. I get real sick of that crap, okay,
because... Texas business... Well, fine, but
they're Dallas outfits. Okay. I would find
working in Dallas extremely boring unless I was in
the tax office and I would have probably been fired
like their tax assessor was on their evaluation.
To me, that's boring. They are, for all practical
purposes, they could consider themselves just
like an eastern city. They're surrounded by
suburbs, suburban villages, towns. They can't
annex them. We're not. And we won't allow that to
happen. The downside of that is that In terms of
federal funding, we didn't talk about it at lunch,
but I'd like to get at it. We did manage to get the
pockets of poverty provisions applied in the UDAG
regulations. Because you're really dealing, if
you deal with Houston, you're dealing with a
region almost. And because the fact that we annex
our suburbs and don't let them incorporate, nor
are we going to start, by the way, we have an
extremely high tax base, but we do have areas of the
city that have been neglected for many, many years
because of the fact that the continued growth
drained the city coffers. And now, basically, the
new annexations are enabling us to renovate and
revitalized some of our inner city
neighborhoods. And clearly they're paying the
bill. So it's not the fault of the suburban areas.
We're annexing these areas and they're saying,
well, fine, you know, and we don't have any parks.
But those guys out there are paying
for the revitalization. So the mistakes that were
made were in the past and not particularly right
now. The last two administrations have had a very
strong policy toward inner city revitalization.
If we've got capital projects, for example, of
equal merit, we're going to put those suckers
inside the loop in the inner city. And that's the
policy. I see on the map up here the Woodlands and
Tomball, which, well, Tomball is within the
county and Woodlands is not. People are
experiencing problems now who live in the
woodlands of commuting into Houston, and I think
that they're attempting to resolve these, not
perhaps solve them, but resolve them in terms of
carpooling and so forth. Would you care to comment
on the problem that Houston faces with the impact
of energy on places like the Woodlands, outlying
communities that have a clear economic
relationship to Houston itself? Well, they've
got a clear economic relationship, but it may not
be a homework journey related. A good many people
in the woodlands work in the woodlands. One of the
things that Mental Energy had tried to do was to get
a contained situation. And there are a number of
vanpools coming from the woodlands in the
downtown. And there's a number of employers, for
example, that are using vanpools. It's been very,
very successful here. They've really done well.
Utilization of contraflow lanes. But there's
Again, I'm quoting a public works deputy
director. We're about 20 years behind in our
surface transportation streets and maybe 30 in
drainage
because of the magnitude of the growth. And the
fact that in annexing outlying areas, we picked up
a whole lot of crap, a whole lot of old county roads,
big crown, deep ditch. And we're having to go in
later and make those up to snuff. And there's no
real, again, one of the problems that you get with a
non-zoning situation, the only way that we're
controlling any kind of growth right now is by
sewer permit. And that's by court order. And of
course, that's not a very good way to control
growth because waste load and waste flow doesn't
necessarily mean anything. Other than that, I'd
hate to control growth from a sewer standpoint.
That's probably the last way I'd want to control
it. That's sort of the bottom end of the thing. Yes,
it is. And the sewage doesn't care. It
is a problem. Is it a policy of the city of Houston
now to take a look at development directions in
terms of whether or not they will grant a sewer
permit for the area? I'm sorry? Right now, before
you get a building permit, you have to get a letter
of availability from the city. So that can mean any
number of things. If a plant is overloaded, you
don't get a permit. If a collection line,
interceptor source, whatever is overloaded, you
don't get a permit. But is it all mechanical like
that? Is it merely an engineering consideration,
or is it a growth policy consideration? By
definition, it's a growth policy consideration,
but it is an engineering reasoning. In other
words, if the pipes won't handle it, you don't get
the permit. I wouldn't call that planning by any
stretch of the imagination. It's not like if you
put an apartment building down here, it's going to
create so many cars that you'll never get up the
street. That's not considered. What is
considered is if those 160 units are going to
overflow somewhere. And then you don't get your
permit. And four-fifths of the city, I think, are
restricted this time to five units to the acre.
Five units to the acre. And that's at a time when we
ought to be wide open in the inner city. It's a
shame. Because now the market is such that a good
number of areas could be redeveloped at a higher
density. And we can't do it because we'll all go to
jail. Because we've got a court order saying we've
got to do this and we've got to do that. Well, Mayor
McCann was on television recently saying that
they were spending X millions of dollars to double
the capacity of the sewage treatment facility in
Houston. Could you elaborate on that and also what
the city expects to be able to do as a consequence?
OK. Well, over the next four years,
the city plans to spend in total funding about $2.4
billion in physical facilities development.
We've got about $732 million of wastewater
facilities planned. That includes anticipated
EPA funding and our revenue bonds. We should, at
the end of 1983,
be able to handle our
projected waste load. on any growth option you
choose. The major problem in the city is the north
side sewage treatment plant, which covers
roughly the north half of the city. And it was
designed for about 50 MGD, and it was liable to run
75 or 100 on a wet day. We've got a multi-million
dollar I think it's about 150 million and counting
sister plant to that one, located on the bio around
the loop. When you say on a wet day, that causes me to
wonder if the sewage system for Houston has been
divided into storm sewers and domestic sewers.
Yes, it has been. They're separate. They're
separate? Yes. I think the last combination
sewer, I think, was downtown. I think we did away
with it. What we do have is portions of the system
that have just worn out. And you do get your
infiltration. I see. Okay, well, you're worlds
ahead of San Francisco. No, we don't do combined.
No, to treat stormwater runoff in the city of
Houston, no, we couldn't afford it. I mean, that's
dumb. We don't want to do that. Anywhere. No, no. No
way, Jose. Uh-uh. No, but we, you know, in our water
system, the same way we're looking to spend
roughly the same amount of money on the water
system. It needs to be reworked. We have a loop
system. It's one system throughout the city. And
we're looking at improving it, a major rework of
that system. With EPA funds? No, there's no EPA
funds for water. We do it on our rates. And
therefore, we're looking at increased water
rates.
But people are having to pay now, I think, for the
luxury that they were afforded 10 years ago. I
think that the bullet was beginning to be bitten
with hawkins, and I think the mayor now has bitten
even more of it. But we've got to do it. It's very
unpleasant and politically very unpopular. But
somebody's got to pay the piper. And the balloon
notes do. OK,
well, Rick, there have been critics of
architecture and of planning in the past who have
noticed certain characteristics about Houston,
which they have commented upon in one way or
another, usually with some negative thoughts.
Do you believe that the planning process exists in
Houston?
Do you believe that it's effective? Do you think
that it's capable in terms of what we as planners
identify as a planning process to handle the
challenges of the future in Houston? Yeah, I think
regardless of... What changes would you, you
know, envision as being appropriate? Well, one
thing I have a problem with planning and planners
about is that they don't want to be political. That
they are the I don't remember which idiot wrote it,
but saying they just merely make recommendations
to the decision maker. Well, to me, if you're not
political, then you're not in the decision
process. So I would suggest, you know, somebody
telling me they're not going to be political, I'm
going to tell them to drop dead because I don't want
to hear what they're saying because it's not going
to matter. So to me, planning, the worst thing
that's happened to planning is that it got out of
the politics. Because the politics are what makes
the decisions. Whereas I think that some planning
expertise interjected into the political
process could be much better than sitting over
there and all those weirdos over here talking
about this shit that they don't know anything
about. We're going to do this because I got the
money. It's the golden rule. I got the role. The
gold makes the rules. I find that we do have a
planning process here. It's very political. I
think that more planning rules, planning theory,
is being interjected into the decision process
here, whereas before it wasn't. I think people are
more interested in planning considerations now
rather than pure economic considerations than
there were before. And I see that happening for the
virtue of me being appointed where I am. Who wants a
planter on their goddamn stand? And so I feel that
the planting profession itself has done itself an
injustice by not being political, not getting in
there and, you know, well, I recommended no. Well,
you know, that was ridiculous. And so you're clean
and free. And I think too many planters cover their
ass first without thinking for a minute why their
ass is there in the first place. And I think that's
the major failing of planting. And I think in
defense of the houston planning process you know
there are a lot of planners around here that may not
call themselves planners but to me planning for
something without any insurance that it's going
to occur is sort of a futile exercise and i think
that that planning in a sense of houston without
the zoning traditional land use management or
controls or whatever You know, I think we have a
planning process. It might be between me and the
director of public works and the mayor and a couple
of developers, but there is a process by which
development occurs and regardless of how
disorderly it may appear, we know it's happening.
You know, again, there has been an absence of
planning regimens stuck into the decision
process and I think that it's turning around here
roscoe may disagree with me but i i find that that's
the case i find that's a major shortcoming of
planners in general as they refuse to be political
with the exception of maybe what's his name in san
francisco no jacobs jacobs yeah jacobs kind of got
in there yeah but most planning directors don't
roy alcobar you know was removed unceremoniously
a couple of weeks ago i didn't know that Of course,
he's an architect now, aside from that. But could
you briefly
give us a kind of a thumbnail sketch of the planning
process in Houston, aside from the generalities?
There's a planning department, and then, of
course, your role here in the mayor's office, and
then there's council and all that. Well,
I'm not real sure I understand what you're saying.
I'm not quite sure how to ask the question. I'm
trying to figure out what tool.
We're talking about physical facilities
planning. I think basically most people planning
think of land use planning. But an overall
resource allocation, which I consider planning.
But for example, is there much opportunity for
private citizens to be involved in the process?
Are there any citizens groups that are pressure
groups, advocacy groups in Houston? Do they have
any effect on the overall process of community
development at all? In terms of the, it just
depends on the myriad of programs we have. In
community development, for example, City
Museum, they have a direct input. I mean, they get
to pick what they want, basically, unless it runs
uphill or something. The city, by and large, does
that. For a while, Houston had mobile city halls in
the neighborhood, as I remember, under the model
cities program. Yes, we did. when the citizens
could go into their own neighborhood city hall and
they wouldn't feel so intimidated about
appearing in a municipal edifice. They would
happen to be a trader in their neighborhood park,
whereas they might feel somewhat more
apprehensive about coming to city hall and
attending a city council meeting. Well, of
course, the thing that the Model City program did
throughout the country, I think, was show the
people the way to city hall. It did so here. And we
have numerous citizens appearing before the city
council as well as getting calls all day about
complaints. We don't have as active an inspection
and keeping our own house because of just the sheer
570 square miles of the city because people ride
around trying to find things wrong. We barely can
do that. The city has gotten much more responsive,
I think, with the new council since we switched
from an at-large to a district council at
answering citizen complaints. But it's
basically up to the citizen to say, hey, my
street's messed up or hey, my water line's broken
because we just don't have the resources to do
that. We barely have enough resources to get
things fixed. But I mean, it's not like it's just
spread out. I mean, the physical, the
geographical makeup of the city is such that it's
really very difficult to do proper maintenance.
Another question I have is, in view of the fact that
Houston has this incredible economy,
how is it that the city can't take care of its
day-to-day needs and just keep things patched up
and so forth? I mean, a lot of communities I can
think of offhand would be delighted to have some of
the industrial base that Houston has as revenue
potential. Is there some problem with the revenue
aspect of this?
No, it may be a matter of whether or not the city
council will agree to tax the citizenry at a rate
required to hire the people and provide the
material. When you say the citizenry, do you mean
residences? I'm talking about the ad valorem tax,
which is the large share of our... OK. Applied to
industrial plants as well. Just the fact that the
taxes that we're bringing in are insufficient in
most people's minds to do the job. Last year, for
example, the mayor proposed a 10 cent tax increase
for street maintenance, which would raise, I
don't know what it is, 1,600,000 per penny in a
millage, and the council turning down.
We are in a tax freeze with 77 values, and this year
we're in deep trouble because of inflation,
frozen tax values, and an election year. So
they're not about to raise taxes in an election
year. So we're really in trouble this year, and
it's a bad time for anybody than to be running for
office right now because there's just not enough
money. We ran out of money to pick up the garbage
last year. We've run out of money, and we're just
not
really responsive to the needs of the city
government. It's like, well, we've got to save
money.
Time to retrench and tread water a bit. Yeah, yeah.
That's sort of what it is, increased verbosity.
Now the other two points that I wanted to mention is
one in terms of transportation planning in the
city of Houston that I don't feel personally as a
planner that the transit solution, be it a myriad
of buses, heavy rail system, or whatever in itself
is going to solve our problems in the city of
Houston. I think that basically it's a land use
solution, and some controls need to be applied to
ensure the success of the system and that the
system works. Because you just can't superimpose
a grid on 570 square miles of the city and expect
everybody to be able to go where they need to go.